README.md, before:

icvpn-scripts
=============
[![Build Status][Travis image]][Travis]

[Travis image]: https://travis-ci.org/freifunk/icvpn-scripts.svg
[Travis]: https://travis-ci.org/freifunk/icvpn-scripts

This is a collection of scripts for working with the [icvpn-meta repository].
While the actual data about the communities' networks and stuff goes there,
these scripts use that data to do something with it.

### Why is this a separate repository?
While the [icvpn-meta repository] is intended to be updated automatically to
receive updated data, it is obviously not a good idea to automatically update
the scripts that are periodically executed on a server. To prevent people from
shooting themselves in the foot by not reading a readme that says "copy the
scripts, don't use them directly!", the scripts were split off into this
repository.


Requirements
------------
All of the scripts are currently written in Python and need the `python-yaml`
package.

All of the scripts need a checked out version of the [icvpn-meta repository],
and expect it by default to be in the subdirectory `data` of the current
working directory. However, they all support the `-s` or `--source` switch to
specify another location.

### Debian
On Debian `apt-get install python-yaml` should install all dependencies.

#### Debian Wheezy (oldstable)
You might run into problems because of a missing ipaddress module (shipped with python >= 3.3), so install it via pip.
```
apt-get install python-yaml python3-pip
pip-3.2 install ipaddress
```


Find Free Resources (`findfree`)
--------------------------------
`findfree` searches for free transfer ip and ip subnet allocations in the predefined
network segments.

**Note** that it is crucial to have an up to date [icvpn-meta repository] to
ensure the utility outputs useful data.

The output of `findfree --help`
```
usage: findfree [-h] [-s DIRECTORY] [-p PREFIX] [-c COUNT]

Find free resources in the Freifunk ICVPN Universe

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -s DIRECTORY, --source-dir DIRECTORY
                        path to the local copy of the icvpn-metarepository
                        (Default: ../icvpn-meta/)
  -p PREFIX, --prefix-length PREFIX
                        Required prefix length (Default: 16)
  -c COUNT, --count COUNT
                        The amount of options to show (Default: 5)

Make sure your copy of icvpn-meta is up to date, to ensure this utility
produces useful results.
```

Generate configurations (`mkconfig`)
------------------------------------
`mkconfig` generates configurations for various targets. Each target
is selectable through a sub-command. 

The output of `mkconfig --help`
```
usage: mkconfig [-h] [-s DIR] [-x COMMUNITIES]
                unbound, dnsmasq, quagga, smokeping, bind-forward, bind,
                bird-roa, bird ...

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -s DIR, --sourcedir DIR
                        Use files in DIR as input files. Default: ../icvpn-
                        meta/
  -x COMMUNITIES, --exclude COMMUNITIES
                        Exclude the comma-separated list of COMMUNITIES

format:
  Create config in format.

  unbound, dnsmasq, quagga, smokeping, bind-forward, bind, bird-roa, bird
```

### BGP (`mkconfig {bird, quagga}`)

Generates the configuration for a BGP server (currently bird and quagga
are supported) that wants to participate in the IC-VPN. It requires an already
working Layer 2 connection (Tinc, see [the icvpn repository]) and sets up BGP
sessions with other communities. This was the main reason for having the
[icvpn-meta repository] at all, to speed up the integration of new peers.

**Note** that other communities' BGP servers probably won't accept your
connection if they don't know you as a peer. It is therefore necessary to
create a suitable community file in the [icvpn-meta repository], and even then,
only communities generating their BGP communities from that repository will
accept your connection after the next update. Many communities manage their
configuration by hand, so rejected connections are not unusual.

The output of `mkconfig bird --help`:
```
usage: mkconfig bird [-h] [-4] [-6] [-p PREFIX] [-d TEMPLATE]
                     [-t COMMUNITY:TEMPLATE]

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -4                    Generate IPv4 config
  -6                    Generate IPv6 config
  -p PREFIX, --prefix PREFIX
                        Prefix, e.g. bgp_icvpn_
  -d TEMPLATE, --default TEMPLATE
                        Default template/peer-group to use
  -t COMMUNITY:TEMPLATE, --template COMMUNITY:TEMPLATE
                        Use different template/peer-groupfor some communities
```

### ROA (`mkconfig bird-roa`)

Creates a Route Origin Authorization (ROA) table for a bgp server
(currently only bird is supported). ROAs can be used in filters to link
prefixes to ASNs. By that, announcements are validated with the data from
the [icvpn-meta repository], so that prefixes are only imported if announced
by the correct community.

**Note** that this script does only output one ROA statement per prefix and
ASN, so you have to surround the output yourself with the appropriate table
statement, e.g. like `roa table icvpn_roa { include "roa.con?" }`.

The ROA table can then be used in a filter
```
filter icvpn_in {
  if roa_check(icvpn_roa, net, bgp_path.last) = ROA_INVALID then {
    print "ROA check failed for ", net, " ASN ", bgp_path.last;
    reject;
  }
  accept;
}
```
which then can be used e.g. in a template `import filter icvpn_in;`.

The output of `mkconfig bird-roa --help`:
``` 
Usage: mkroa [options]

Options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -f FMT, --format=FMT  Create config in format FMT.
                        Possible values: bird.
  -4                    Generate IPv4 config
  -6                    Generate IPv6 config
  -s DIR, --sourcedir=DIR
                        Use files in DIR as input files.
                        Default: data/
  -x COMMUNITIES, --exclude=COMMUNITIES
                        Exclude the comma-separated list of COMMUNITIES
  -m DEFAULT_MAX_PREFIXLEN, --max=DEFAULT_MAX_PREFIXLEN
                        max prefix length to accept
```


### DNS (`mkconfig {dnsmasq, bind, bind-forward, unbound`)

Generates configuration for DNS servers (currently bind and dnsmasq are
supported) to enable it to resolve the custom top level domains and reverse
`.arpa` zones of Freifunk communities by configuring the appropriate DNS
servers as forwarders for these zones.

This of course requires a working connection to the DNS servers of the
communities. While for some communities a global IPv6 connection might be
enough to reach their servers, others do not use global IPv6 and you need a
connection to the IC-VPN itself to connect (either using IPv6 or IPv4).

The output of `mkconfig bind --help`:
```
usage: mkconfig bind [-h] [--filter {v6,v4}]

optional arguments:
  -h, --help        show this help message and exit
  --filter {v6,v4}  Only include certain servers. Possible choices: v6, v4
```


### Smokeping (`mkconfig smokeping`)
Generates the configuration for a [Smokeping] instance to make it
monitor the BGP servers of all communities. This obviously requires a working
Layer 2 IC-VPN connection (Tinc, see [icvpn repository]), or else none of them
should be reachable..

Smokeping command has no additional arguments.

[Smokeping]: http://oss.oetiker.ch/smokeping/


Integrity checking (`check`)
----------------------------
This script checks the integrity [icvpn-meta repository]'s checkout and is used
as [its Travis CI hook](https://travis-ci.org/freifunk/icvpn-meta/). You can
use it to test your own submission to that repository beforehand, but it isn't
of much use otherwise.

Note that `check` requires Python **3.3**, for it provides an excellent
[IPv4/IPv6 manipulation
library](https://docs.python.org/3.3/library/ipaddress.html)

Contributing
------------
You have an idea how to use the data in the [icvpn-meta repository]
programmatically, don't hesitate to contribute a new script. If it generates a
configuration of some kind, you might want to have a look at the `formatter`
module, which offers the `Formatter` base class that could ease the process of
config generation.

Of course, we are also happy to support more programs in the already existing
scripts!

[icvpn repository]: https://github.com/freifunk/icvpn
[icvpn-meta repository]: https://github.com/freifunk/icvpn-meta

Commit message:

generic network lists
An generic formatter for network lists.

README.md, after:

icvpn-scripts
=============
[![Build Status][Travis image]][Travis]

[Travis image]: https://travis-ci.org/freifunk/icvpn-scripts.svg
[Travis]: https://travis-ci.org/freifunk/icvpn-scripts

This is a collection of scripts for working with the [icvpn-meta repository].
While the actual data about the communities' networks and stuff goes there,
these scripts use that data to do something with it.

### Why is this a separate repository?
While the [icvpn-meta repository] is intended to be updated automatically to
receive updated data, it is obviously not a good idea to automatically update
the scripts that are periodically executed on a server. To prevent people from
shooting themselves in the foot by not reading a readme that says "copy the
scripts, don't use them directly!", the scripts were split off into this
repository.


Requirements
------------
All of the scripts are currently written in Python and need the `python-yaml`
package.

All of the scripts need a checked out version of the [icvpn-meta repository],
and expect it by default to be in the subdirectory `data` of the current
working directory. However, they all support the `-s` or `--source` switch to
specify another location.

### Debian
On Debian `apt-get install python-yaml` should install all dependencies.

#### Debian Wheezy (oldstable)
You might run into problems because of a missing ipaddress module (shipped with python >= 3.3), so install it via pip.
```
apt-get install python-yaml python3-pip
pip-3.2 install ipaddress
```


Find Free Resources (`findfree`)
--------------------------------
`findfree` searches for free transfer ip and ip subnet allocations in the predefined
network segments.

**Note** that it is crucial to have an up to date [icvpn-meta repository] to
ensure the utility outputs useful data.

The output of `findfree --help`
```
usage: findfree [-h] [-s DIRECTORY] [-p PREFIX] [-c COUNT]

Find free resources in the Freifunk ICVPN Universe

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -s DIRECTORY, --source-dir DIRECTORY
                        path to the local copy of the icvpn-metarepository
                        (Default: ../icvpn-meta/)
  -p PREFIX, --prefix-length PREFIX
                        Required prefix length (Default: 16)
  -c COUNT, --count COUNT
                        The amount of options to show (Default: 5)

Make sure your copy of icvpn-meta is up to date, to ensure this utility
produces useful results.
```

Generate configurations (`mkconfig`)
------------------------------------
`mkconfig` generates configurations for various targets. Each target
is selectable through a sub-command. 

The output of `mkconfig --help`
```
usage: mkconfig [-h] [-s DIR] [-x COMMUNITIES]
                unbound, dnsmasq, quagga, smokeping, bind-forward, bind,
                bird-roa, bird ...

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -s DIR, --sourcedir DIR
                        Use files in DIR as input files. Default: ../icvpn-
                        meta/
  -x COMMUNITIES, --exclude COMMUNITIES
                        Exclude the comma-separated list of COMMUNITIES

format:
  Create config in format.

  unbound, dnsmasq, quagga, smokeping, bind-forward, bind, bird-roa, bird
```

### BGP (`mkconfig {bird, quagga}`)

Generates the configuration for a BGP server (currently bird and quagga
are supported) that wants to participate in the IC-VPN. It requires an already
working Layer 2 connection (Tinc, see [the icvpn repository]) and sets up BGP
sessions with other communities. This was the main reason for having the
[icvpn-meta repository] at all, to speed up the integration of new peers.

**Note** that other communities' BGP servers probably won't accept your
connection if they don't know you as a peer. It is therefore necessary to
create a suitable community file in the [icvpn-meta repository], and even then,
only communities generating their BGP communities from that repository will
accept your connection after the next update. Many communities manage their
configuration by hand, so rejected connections are not unusual.

The output of `mkconfig bird --help`:
```
usage: mkconfig bird [-h] [-4] [-6] [-p PREFIX] [-d TEMPLATE]
                     [-t COMMUNITY:TEMPLATE]

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -4                    Generate IPv4 config
  -6                    Generate IPv6 config
  -p PREFIX, --prefix PREFIX
                        Prefix, e.g. bgp_icvpn_
  -d TEMPLATE, --default TEMPLATE
                        Default template/peer-group to use
  -t COMMUNITY:TEMPLATE, --template COMMUNITY:TEMPLATE
                        Use different template/peer-groupfor some communities
```

### ROA (`mkconfig bird-roa`)

Creates a Route Origin Authorization (ROA) table for a bgp server
(currently only bird is supported). ROAs can be used in filters to link
prefixes to ASNs. By that, announcements are validated with the data from
the [icvpn-meta repository], so that prefixes are only imported if announced
by the correct community.

**Note** that this script does only output one ROA statement per prefix and
ASN, so you have to surround the output yourself with the appropriate table
statement, e.g. like `roa table icvpn_roa { include "roa.con?" }`.

The ROA table can then be used in a filter
```
filter icvpn_in {
  if roa_check(icvpn_roa, net, bgp_path.last) = ROA_INVALID then {
    print "ROA check failed for ", net, " ASN ", bgp_path.last;
    reject;
  }
  accept;
}
```
which then can be used e.g. in a template `import filter icvpn_in;`.

The output of `mkconfig bird-roa --help`:
``` 
Usage: mkroa [options]

Options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -f FMT, --format=FMT  Create config in format FMT.
                        Possible values: bird.
  -4                    Generate IPv4 config
  -6                    Generate IPv6 config
  -s DIR, --sourcedir=DIR
                        Use files in DIR as input files.
                        Default: data/
  -x COMMUNITIES, --exclude=COMMUNITIES
                        Exclude the comma-separated list of COMMUNITIES
  -m DEFAULT_MAX_PREFIXLEN, --max=DEFAULT_MAX_PREFIXLEN
                        max prefix length to accept
```


### DNS (`mkconfig {dnsmasq, bind, bind-forward, unbound`)

Generates configuration for DNS servers (currently bind and dnsmasq are
supported) to enable it to resolve the custom top level domains and reverse
`.arpa` zones of Freifunk communities by configuring the appropriate DNS
servers as forwarders for these zones.

This of course requires a working connection to the DNS servers of the
communities. While for some communities a global IPv6 connection might be
enough to reach their servers, others do not use global IPv6 and you need a
connection to the IC-VPN itself to connect (either using IPv6 or IPv4).

The output of `mkconfig bind --help`:
```
usage: mkconfig bind [-h] [--filter {v6,v4}]

optional arguments:
  -h, --help        show this help message and exit
  --filter {v6,v4}  Only include certain servers. Possible choices: v6, v4
```


### Smokeping (`mkconfig smokeping`)
Generates the configuration for a [Smokeping] instance to make it
monitor the BGP servers of all communities. This obviously requires a working
Layer 2 IC-VPN connection (Tinc, see [icvpn repository]), or else none of them
should be reachable..

Smokeping command has no additional arguments.

[Smokeping]: http://oss.oetiker.ch/smokeping/


### Network (`mkconfig network`)

Generates a list over all networks of all selected communities. This for example
useful to create ipset rulesets or to restrict access to dns zones.

The output of `mkdir network --help`:
```
usage: mkconfig network [-h] [-4] [-6] [-b BEGIN] [-e END] [-p PREFIX]
                        [-s SUFFIX] [-d DELIM]

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -4                    Only IPv4 networks
  -6                    Only IPv6 networks
  -b BEGIN, --begin BEGIN
                        Prefix to the list
  -e END, --end END     Suffix to the list
  -p PREFIX, --prefix PREFIX
                        Prefix for an network string
  -s SUFFIX, --suffix SUFFIX
                        Suffix for an network string
  -d DELIM, --delimiter DELIM
                        Delimiter between two network strings
```

Examples:

 * Bind list: ```./mkconfig network -p "\"" -s "\"" -d ";"```


Integrity checking (`check`)
----------------------------
This script checks the integrity [icvpn-meta repository]'s checkout and is used
as [its Travis CI hook](https://travis-ci.org/freifunk/icvpn-meta/). You can
use it to test your own submission to that repository beforehand, but it isn't
of much use otherwise.

Note that `check` requires Python **3.3**, for it provides an excellent
[IPv4/IPv6 manipulation
library](https://docs.python.org/3.3/library/ipaddress.html)

Contributing
------------
You have an idea how to use the data in the [icvpn-meta repository]
programmatically, don't hesitate to contribute a new script. If it generates a
configuration of some kind, you might want to have a look at the `formatter`
module, which offers the `Formatter` base class that could ease the process of
config generation.

Of course, we are also happy to support more programs in the already existing
scripts!

[icvpn repository]: https://github.com/freifunk/icvpn
[icvpn-meta repository]: https://github.com/freifunk/icvpn-meta
